Random Walk to Graphene
nobel lecture, december 8, 2010
by Andre K. Geim
School of physics and astronomy, the University of manchester, oxford
Road, manchester m13 9pl, United kingdom.
If one wants to understand the beautiful physics of graphene, they will
be spoiled for choice with so many reviews and popular science articles
now available. I hope that the reader will excuse me if on this occasion I
recommend my own writings [1–3]. Instead of repeating myself here, I have
chosen to describe my twisty scientific road that eventually led to the nobel
prize. most parts of this story are not described anywhere else, and its timeline 
covers the period from my phd in 1987 to the moment when our 2004
paper, recognised by the nobel Committee, was accepted for publication.
the story naturally gets denser in events and explanations towards the end.
also, it provides a detailed review of pre-2004 literature and, with the benefit
of hindsight, attempts to analyse why graphene has attracted so much interest. 
I have tried my best to make this article not only informative but also easy
to read, even for non-physicists.ZombIe manaGement
my phd thesis was called “Investigation of mechanisms of transport relaxation in metals 
by a helicon resonance method”. all I can say is that the stuff
was as interesting at that time as it sounds to the reader today. I published five
journal papers and finished the thesis in five years, the official duration for
a phd at my institution, the Institute of Solid State physics. Web of Science soberly 
reveals that the papers were cited twice, by co-authors only. the subject
was dead a decade before I even started my phd. however, every cloud has
its silver lining, and what I uniquely learned from that experience was that I
should never torture research students by offering them “zombie” projects.
after my phd, I worked as a staff scientist at the Institute of microelectronics technology, 
Chernogolovka, which belongs to the Russian
academy of Sciences. the Soviet system allowed and even encouraged junior
staff to choose their own line of research. after a year of poking in different
directions, I separated research-wise from my former phd supervisor, Victor
petrashov, and started developing my own niche. It was an experimental
system that was both new and doable, which was nearly an oxymoron, taking
into account the scarce resources available at the time at Soviet research
institutes. I fabricated a sandwich consisting of a thin metal film and a superconductor 
separated by a thin insulator. the superconductor served only to
condense an external magnetic field into an array of vortices, and this highly
inhomogeneous magnetic field was projected onto the film under investigation. electron transport 
in such a microscopically inhomogeneous field
(varying on a submicron scale) was new research territory, and I published
the first experimental report on the subject [4], which was closely followed
by an independent paper from Simon bending [5]. It was an interesting
and reasonably important niche, and I continued studying the subject for
the next few years, including a spell at the University of bath in 1991 as a
postdoctoral researcher working with Simon.
this experience taught me an important lesson: that introducing a new
experimental system is generally more rewarding than trying to find new
phenomena within crowded areas. the chances of success are much higher
where the field is new. of course, the fantastic results one originally hopes
for are unlikely to materialise, but, in the process of studying any new system,
something original inevitably shows up.
one man’S jUnk, anotheR man’S Gold
In 1990, thanks to Vitaly aristov, director of my Institute in Chernogolovka
at the time, I received a six month visiting fellowship from the british
Royal Society. laurence eaves and peter main from nottingham University
kindly agreed to accept me as a visitor. Six months is a very short period for
experimental work, and circumstances dictated that I could only study devices readily available 
in the host laboratory. available were submicron Gaas
wires left over from previous experiments, all done and dusted a few years
earlier. Under the circumstances, my experience of working in a povertystricken Soviet academy was helpful. 
the samples that my hosts considered
practically exhausted looked like a gold vein to me, and I started working
100 hours per week to exploit it. this short visit led to two Phys. Rev. Letters
of decent quality [6,7], and I often use this experience to tease my younger
colleagues. When things do not go as planned and people start complaining,
I provoke them by proclaiming ‘there is no such thing as bad samples; there
are only bad postdocs/students’. Search carefully and you will always find
something new. of course, it is better to avoid such experiences and explore
new territories, but even if one is fortunate enough to find an experimental
system as new and exciting as graphene, meticulousness and perseverance
allow one to progress much further.
the pace of research at nottingham was so relentless and, at the same time
so inspiring, that a return to Russia was not an option. Swimming through
Soviet treacle seemed no less than wasting the rest of my life. So at the age
of thirty-three and with an h-index of 1 (latest papers not yet published), I
entered the Western job market for postdocs. during the next four years I
moved between different universities, from nottingham to Copenhagen to
bath and back to nottingham. each move allowed me to get acquainted with
yet another topic or two, significantly broadening my research horizons. the
physics I studied in those years could be broadly described as mesoscopic and
involved such systems and phenomena as two-dimensional electron gases
(2deGs), quantum point contacts, resonant tunnelling and the quantum
hall effect (Qhe), to name but a few. In addition, I became familiar with
Gaalas heterostructures grown by molecular beam epitaxy (mbe) and
improved my expertise in microfabrication and electron-beam lithography,
technologies I had started learning in Russia. all these elements came
together to form the foundation for the successful work on graphene a
decade later.
dUtCh ComfoRt
by 1994 I had published enough quality papers and attended enough conferences to hope for 
a permanent academic position. When I was offered
an associate professorship at the University of nijmegen, I instantly seized
upon the chance of having some security in my new post-Soviet life. the first
task in nijmegen was of course to establish myself. to this end, there was no
start-up and no microfabrication to continue any of my previous lines of research. as resources, 
I was offered access to magnets, cryostats and electronic
equipment available at nijmegen’s high field magnet laboratory, led by jan
kees maan. he was also my formal boss and in charge of all the money. even
when I was awarded grants as the principal investigator (the dutch funding
agency fom was generous during my stay in nijmegen), I could not spend
the money as I wished. all funds were distributed through so-called ‘working
groups’ led by full professors. In addition, phd students in the netherlands
could formally be supervised only by full professors. although this probably
sounds strange to many, this was the dutch academic system of the 1990s. It
was tough for me then. for a couple of years, I really struggled to adjust to
the system, which was such a contrast to my joyful and productive years at
nottingham. In addition, the situation was a bit surreal because outside the
university walls I received a warm-hearted welcome from everyone around,
including jan kees and other academics.
Still, the research opportunities in nijmegen were much better than in
Russia and, eventually, I managed to survive scientifically, thanks to help
from abroad. nottingham colleagues (in particular mohamed henini)
provided me with 2deGs that were sent to Chernogolovka, where Sergey
dubonos, a close colleague and friend from the 1980s, microfabricated
requested devices. the research topic I eventually found and later focused
on can be referred to as mesoscopic superconductivity. Sergey and I used
micron-sized hall bars made from a 2deG as local probes of the magnetic
field around small superconducting samples. this allowed measurements
of their magnetisation with accuracy sufficient to detect not only the entry
and exit of individual vortices but also much more subtle changes. this was
a new experimental niche, made possible by the development of an original
technique of ballistic hall micromagnetometry [8]. during the next few
years, we exploited this niche area and published several papers in Nature
and Phys. Rev. Letters which reported a paramagnetic meissner effect, vortices
carrying fractional flux, vortex configurations in confined geometries and so
on. my wife Irina Grigorieva, an expert in vortex physics [9], could not find
a job in the netherlands and therefore had plenty of time to help me with
conquering the subject and writing papers. also, Sergey not only made the
devices but also visited nijmegen to help with measurements. We established
a very productive modus operandi where he collected data and I analysed
them within an hour on my computer next door to decide what should be
done next.
a Spell of leVIty
the first results on mesoscopic superconductivity started emerging in 1996,
which made me feel safer within the dutch system and also more inquisitive. I started looking around 
for new areas to explore. the major facility
at nijmegen’s high field lab was powerful electromagnets. they were a
major headache, too. these magnets could provide fields up to 20 t, which
was somewhat higher than 16 to 18 t available with the superconducting
magnets that many of our competitors had. on the other hand, the electromagnets were so expensive 
to run that we could use them only for a few
hours at night, when electricity was cheaper. my work on mesoscopic superconductivity required only 
tiny fields (< 0.01t), and I did not use the electromagnets. this made me feel guilty as well as 
responsible for coming up with
experiments that would justify the facility’s existence. the only competitive
edge I could see in the electromagnets was their room temperature (T)
bore. this was often considered as an extra disadvantage because research
in condensed matter physics typically requires low, liquid-helium T. the contradiction prompted me, 
as well as other researchers working in the lab, to
ponder on high-field phenomena at room T. Unfortunately, there were few
to choose from.
eventually, I stumbled across the mystery of so-called magnetic water. It
is claimed that putting a small magnet around a hot water pipe prevents
formation of scale inside the pipe. or install such a magnet on a water tap,
and your kettle will never suffer from chalky deposits. these magnets are
available in a great variety in many shops and on the internet. there are also
hundreds of articles written on this phenomenon, but the physics behind it
remains unclear, and many researchers are sceptical about the very existence
of the effect [10]. over the last fifteen years I have made several attempts
to investigate “magnetic water” but they were inconclusive, and I still have
nothing to add to the argument. however, the availability of ultra-high fields
in a room T environment invited lateral thinking about water. basically, if
magnetic water existed, I thought, then the effect should be clearer in 20 t
rather than in typical fields of <0.1 t created by standard magnets.
With this idea in mind and, allegedly, on a friday night, I poured water
inside the lab’s electromagnet when it was at its maximum power. pouring
water in one's equipment is certainly not a standard scientific approach, and
I cannot recall why I behaved so ‘unprofessionally’. apparently, no one had
tried such a silly thing before, although similar facilities existed in several
places around the world for decades. to my surprise, water did not end up
on the floor but got stuck in the vertical bore of the magnet. humberto
Carmona, a visiting student from nottingham, and I played for an hour with
the water by breaking the blockage with a wooden stick and changing the
field strength. as a result, we saw balls of levitating water (figure 1). this was
awesome. It took little time to realise that the physics behind was good old
diamagnetism. It took much longer to adjust my intuition to the fact that the
feeble magnetic response of water (~10–5), billions of times weaker than that
of iron, was sufficient to compensate the earth’s gravity. many colleagues,
including those who worked with high magnetic fields all their lives, were
flabbergasted, and some of them even argued that this was a hoax.
I spent the next few months demonstrating magnetic levitation to colleagues
and visitors, as well as trying to make a ‘non-boffin’ illustration for this
beautiful phenomenon. out of the many objects that we had floating inside
the magnet, it was the image of a levitating frog (figure 1) that started the
media hype. more importantly, though, behind all the media noise, this
image found its way into many textbooks. however quirky, it has become a
beautiful symbol of ever-present diamagnetism, which is no longer perceived
to be extremely feeble. Sometimes I am stopped at conferences by people
exclaiming “I know you! Sorry, it is not about graphene. I start my lectures
with showing your frog. Students always want to learn how it could fly.” the
frog story, with some intricate physics behind the stability of diamagnetic
levitation, is described in my review in Physics Today [11].
Figure 1. levitating moments in nijmegen. left – ball of water (about 5 cm in diameter)
freely floats inside the vertical bore of an electromagnet. Right – the frog that learned to
fly. this image continues to serve as a symbol showing that magnetism of ‘nonmagnetic
things’, including humans, is not so negligible. this experiment earned michael berry and
me the 2000 Ig nobel prize. We were asked first whether we dared to accept this prize, and
I take pride in our sense of humour and self-deprecation that we did.
fRIday nIGht expeRImentS
the levitation experience was both interesting and addictive. It taught me
the important lesson that poking in directions far away from my immediate
area of expertise could lead to interesting results, even if the initial ideas
were extremely basic. this in turn influenced my research style, as I started
making similar exploratory detours that somehow acquired the name ‘friday
night experiments’. the term is of course inaccurate. no serious work can
be accomplished in just one night. It usually requires many months of lateral
thinking and digging through irrelevant literature without any clear idea in
sight. eventually, you get a feeling – rather than an idea – about what could
be interesting to explore. next, you give it a try, and normally you fail. then,
you may or may not try again. In any case, at some moment you must decide
(and this is the most difficult part) whether to continue further efforts or cut
losses and start thinking of another experiment. all this happens against the
backdrop of your main research and occupies only a small part of your time
and brain.
already in nijmegen, I started using lateral ideas as under- and postgraduate projects, 
and students were always excited to buy a pig in a poke.
kostya novoselov, who came to nijmegen as a phd student in 1999, took part
in many of these projects. they never lasted for more than a few months,
in order not to jeopardise a thesis or career progression. although the
enthusiasm inevitably vanished towards the end, when the predictable
failures materialised, some students later confided that those exploratory
detours were invaluable experiences.
most surprisingly, failures sometimes failed to materialise. Gecko tape
is one such example. accidentally or not, I read a paper describing the
mechanism behind the amazing climbing ability of geckos [12]. the physics
is rather straightforward. Gecko’s toes are covered with tiny hairs. each hair
attaches to the opposite surface with a minute van der Waals force (in the
nn range), but billions of hairs work together to create a formidable attraction
sufficient to keep geckos attached to any surface, even a glass ceiling. In
particular, my attention was attracted by the spatial scale of their hairs. they
were submicron in diameter, the standard size in research on mesoscopic
physics. after toying with the idea for a year or so, Sergey dubonos and I
came up with procedures to make a material that mimicked a gecko’s hairy
feet. he fabricated a square cm of this tape, and it exhibited notable adhesion
[13]. Unfortunately, the material did not work as well as a gecko’s feet,
deteriorating completely after a couple of attachments. Still, it was an
important proof-of-concept experiment that inspired further work in the field.
hopefully, one day someone will develop a way to replicate the hierarchical
structure of gecko’s setae and its self-cleaning mechanism. then gecko tape
can go on sale.
betteR to be WRonG than boRInG
While preparing for my lecture in Stockholm, I compiled a list of my friday
night experiments. only then did I realise a stunning fact. there were two
dozen or so experiments over a period of approximately fifteen years and, as
expected, most of them failed miserably. but there were three hits: levitation,
gecko tape and graphene. this implies an extraordinary success rate: more
than 10%. moreover, there were probably near-misses, too. for example, I
once read a paper [14] about giant diamagnetism in feGeSeas alloys, which
was interpreted as a sign of high-T superconductivity. I asked lamarches for
samples and got them. kostya and I employed ballistic hall magnetometry
to check for giant diamagnetism but found nothing, even at 1 k. this
happened in 2003, well before the discovery of iron pnictide superconductivity, and 
I still wonder whether there were any small inclusions of a superconducting material 
which we missed with our approach. another miss was an
attempt to detect “heartbeats” of individual living cells. the idea was to use
2deG hall crosses as ultrasensitive electrometers to detect electrical signals
due to physiological activity of individual cells. even though no heartbeats
were detected while a cell was alive, our sensor recorded huge voltage spikes
at its “last gasp” when the cell was treated with excess alcohol [15]. now I
attribute this near-miss to the unwise use of yeast, a very dormant microorganism. four years later, 
similar experiments were done using embryonic
heart cells and – what a surprise – graphene sensors, and they were successful
in detecting such bioelectrical activity [16].
frankly, I do not believe that the above success rate can be explained by
my lateral ideas being particularly good. more likely, this tells us that poking
in new directions, even randomly, is more rewarding than is generally
perceived. We are probably digging too deep within established areas,
leaving plenty of unexplored stuff under the surface, just one poke away.
When one dares to try, rewards are not guaranteed, but at least it is an
adventure.
the manCUnIan Way
by 2000, with mesoscopic superconductivity, diamagnetic levitation and
four Nature papers under my belt, I was well placed to apply for a full
professorship. Colleagues were rather surprised when I chose the University
of manchester, declining a number of seemingly more prestigious offers.
the reason was simple. mike moore, chairman of the search committee,
knew my wife Irina when she was a very successful postdoc in bristol rather
than my co-author and a part-time teaching lab technician in nijmegen.
he suggested that Irina could apply for the lectureship that was there
to support the professorship. after six years in the netherlands, the idea
that a husband and wife could officially work together had not even
crossed my mind. this was the decisive factor. We appreciated not only
the possibility of sorting out our dual career problems but also felt
touched that our future colleagues cared. We have never regretted the
move.
So in early 2001, I took charge of several dilapidated rooms storing ancient
equipment of no value, and a start-up grant of £100k. there were no central
facilities that I could exploit, except for a helium liquefier. no problem. I
followed the same routine as in nijmegen, combining help from other
places, especially Sergey dubonos. the lab started shaping up surprisingly
quickly. Within half a year, I received my first grant of £500k, which allowed
us to acquire essential equipment. despite being consumed with our one
year old daughter, Irina also got her starting grant a few months later. We
invited kostya to join us as a research fellow (he continued to be officially
registered in nijmegen as a phd student until 2004 when he defended his
thesis there). and our group started generating results that led to more
grants that in turn led to more results.
by 2003 we published several good-quality papers including Nature, Nature
Materials and Phys. Rev. Letters, and we continued beefing up the laboratory with new equipment. 
moreover, thanks to a grant of £1.4m (research
infrastructure funding scheme masterminded by the then science minister
david Sainsbury), ernie hill from the department of Computer Sciences
and I managed to set up the manchester Centre for mesoscience and
nanotechnology. Instead of pouring the windfall money into bricks-andmortar, we utilised the 
existing clean room areas (~250 m2) in Computer
Sciences. those rooms contained obsolete equipment, and it was thrown
away and replaced with state-of-the-art microfabrication facilities, including
a new electron-beam lithography system. the fact that ernie and I are most
proud of is that many groups around the world have more expensive facilities
but our Centre has continuously, since 2003, been producing new structures
and devices. We do not have a posh horse here that is for show, but rather a
draft horse that has been working really hard.
Whenever I describe this experience to my colleagues abroad, they find
it difficult to believe that it is possible to establish a fully functional laboratory and 
a microfabrication facility in less than three years and without an
astronomical start-up grant. If not for my own experience, I would not
believe it either. things progressed unbelievably quickly. the University was
supportive, but my greatest thanks are reserved specifically for the responsive
mode of the Uk engineering and physical Sciences Research Council
(epSRC). the funding system is democratic and non-xenophobic. your
position in an academic hierarchy or an old-boys network counts for little.
also, ‘visionary ideas’ and grand promises to ‘address social and economic
needs’ play little role when it comes to the peer review. In truth, the
responsive mode distributes its money on the basis of a recent track record,
whatever that means in different subjects, and the funding normally goes
to researchers who work both efficiently and hard. of course, no system is
perfect, and one can always hope for a better one. however, paraphrasing
Winston Churchill, the Uk has the worst research funding system, except for
all the others that I am aware of.
thRee lIttle CloUdS
as our laboratory and nanotech Centre were shaping up, I got some spare
time for thinking of new research detours. Gecko tape and the failed attempts
with yeast and quasi-pnictides took place during that time. also, Serge
morozov, a senior fellow from Chernogolovka, who later became a regular visitor and invaluable collaborator, 
wasted his first two visits on studying magnetic
water. In the autumn of 2002, our first manchester phd student, da jiang,
arrived, and I needed to invent a phd project for him. It was clear that
for the first few months he needed to spend his time learning english and
getting acquainted with the lab. accordingly, as a starter, I suggested to him a
new lateral experiment. It was to make films of graphite ‘as thin as possible’ and,
if successful, I promised we would then study their ‘mesoscopic’ properties.
Recently, trying to analyse how this idea emerged, I recalled three badly
shaped thought clouds.
one cloud was a concept of ‘metallic electronics’. If an external electric
field is applied to a metal, the number of charge carriers near its surface
changes, so that one may expect that its surface properties change, too.
this is how modern semiconductor electronics works. Why not use a metal
instead of silicon? as an undergraduate student, I wanted to use electric field
effect (efe) and x-ray analysis to induce and detect changes in the lattice
constant. It was naïve because simple estimates show that the effect would
be negligible. Indeed, no dielectric allows fields much higher than 1V/nm,
which translates into maximum changes in charge carrier concentration n
at the metal surface of about 1014 per cm2. In comparison, a typical metal
(e.g., au) contains ~1023 electrons per cm3 and, even for a 1 nm thick film,
this yields relative changes in n and conductivity of ~1%, leaving aside much
smaller changes in the lattice constant.
previously, many researchers aspired to detect the field effect in metals.
the first mention is as far back as 1902, shortly after the discovery of the
electron. j. j. thomson (1906 nobel prize in physics) suggested to Charles
mott, the father of nevill mott (1977 nobel prize in physics), to look for
the efe in a thin metal film, but nothing was found [17]. the first attempt
to measure the efe in a metal was recorded in scientific literature in 1906
[18]. Instead of a normal metal, one could also think of semimetals such
as bismuth, graphite or antimony which have a lot fewer carriers. over the
last century, many researchers used bi films (n ~1018 cm–3) but observed
only small changes in their conductivity [19,20]. aware of this research
area and with experience in Gaalas heterostructures, I was continuously,
albeit casually, looking for other candidates, especially ultra-thin films of
superconductors in which the field effect can be amplified in proximity to
the superconducting transition [21,22]. In nijmegen, my enthusiasm was
once sparked by learning about nm-thick al films grown by mbe on top of
Gaalas heterostructures but, after estimating possible effects, I decided that
the chances of success were so poor it was not worth trying.
Carbon nanotubes were the second cloud hanging around in the late
1990s and early 2000s. those were the years when nanotubes were at the
peak of their glory. living in the netherlands, I heard talks by Cees dekker
and leo kouwenhoven and read papers by thomas ebbesen, paul mceuen,
Sumio Iijima, pheadon avouris and others. each time, those exceptionally
nice results inevitably triggered thoughts about entering this research area.
but I was too late and needed to find a different perspective, away from the
stampede.
as for the third cloud, I read a review of millie dresselhaus about intercalated graphite compounds [23], 
which clearly showed that, even after many
decades, graphite was still a material little understood, especially in terms of
its electronic properties. this influential review prompted me to look further
into graphite literature. In doing so, I encountered papers by pablo esquinazi
and yakov kopelevich, who reported ferromagnetism, superconductivity and
a metal-insulator transition, all in the same good old graphite and at room T
[24,25]. those provocative papers left me with a distinct feeling that graphite
was very much worth having a careful look at.
the three thought clouds (and maybe some more that I cannot recall)
somehow merged into da’s project. I reckoned that if we were to succeed in
making thin films of graphite, instead of bi, they could exhibit some electric
field effect and/or some other interesting properties resembling those of
carbon nanotubes. In the worst-case scenario, our mesoscopic samples would
be monocrystals and this could help to clarify those controversies about
graphite. Why not try to poke in this direction for a few months, I thought.
leGend of SCotCh tape
to make thin graphite films, I provided da with a tablet of pyrolytic graphite,
which was several mm thick and an inch in diameter, and suggested using
a polishing machine. We had a fancy one that allowed submicron flatness.
a few months later, da declared that he had reached the ultimate thickness and showed me a tiny speck 
of graphite at the bottom of a petri dish. I
looked at it in an optical microscope and, by focusing on the top and bottom
surfaces, estimated that the speck was ~10 µm thick. too thick, I thought
and suggested trying a finer polishing liquid. however, it turned out that da
had polished away the whole tablet to obtain this one speck. It was actually
my fault: da successfully finished his phd later, but at that time he was just
a fresh foreign student with a huge language barrier. moreover, by mistake I
gave him high-density graphite instead of highly-oriented pyrolytic graphite
(hopG) as was intended. the former does not shed as easily as hopG.
oleg Shklyarevskii, a senior fellow from kharkov, Ukraine was working
nearby and had to listen to the typical flow of my teasing remarks, this time
about polishing a mountain to get one grain of sand. oleg was an expert in
scanning tunnelling microscopy (Stm) and worked on a project that later
turned out to be another bad ‘friday night’ idea of mine. he interjected
by bringing over a piece of cellotape with graphite flakes attached to it.
allegedly, he just fished out the tape from a litter bin. Indeed, hopG is
the standard reference sample for Stm, where a fresh surface of graphite
is normally prepared by removing a top layer with sticky tape. We used this
technique for years but never looked carefully at what was thrown away along
with the tape. I looked in the microscope at the remnants of graphite (figure
2) and found pieces much thinner than da’s speck. only then did I realise
how silly it was of me to suggest the polishing machine. polishing was dead,
long live Scotch tape!
this moment was not a breakthrough yet, but things started to look
promising and required more people to get involved. oleg did not volunteer
to take on yet another project but kostya did. ‘Volunteer’ is probably not the
right word. everyone in our lab has always been welcome to move around
and participate in whatever project they want. at that time, kostya was working on a nicely-moving 
project on ferromagnetism [26]. he was also our
‘caretaker’ when things went wrong, especially with measuring equipment.
as for me, at that time I used to spend a few hours a day in the lab preparing
samples, doing measurements and analysing results. It was only after 2006
that I turned into a paper-writing machine combined with a data analyser. I
have always loved the latter but hated to write papers. Unfortunately, no lab
can survive without its Shakespeare.
Figure 2. In hindsight, thin crystals of graphite are easy to obtain. a – Remnants of hopG
left attached to Scotch tape. b – Some of the crystals are optically transparent if viewed in
an optical microscope or just with a magnifying glass. c – If placed on an oxidised Si wafer,
transparent crystals give rise to various shades of blue. d – one of our very first devices
made by using ‘a shoestring and sealing wax’: in this case, tweezers, a toothpick and silver
paint.
kostya and I decided to check out the electrical properties of the graphite
flakes found on the cellotape and, to this end, he started transferring them
onto glass slides, initially by using just tweezers. a few days later and keeping
in mind the initial motivation, I brought in oxidised Si wafers in order to use
them as substrates and detect the efe. this delivered an unexpected bonus.
placing thin graphite fragments onto those wafers allowed us to observe
interference colours that indicated that some of the fragments were optically
transparent. moreover, the colours provided us with a very intuitive way of
judging which flakes were thin (figure 2c). We quickly found that some of
them were just a few nm thick. this was our first real breakthrough.
eUReka moment
In graphene literature and especially in popular articles, a strong emphasis
is placed on the Scotch tape technique, and it is hailed for allowing the
isolation and identification of ultra-thin graphite films and graphene. for
me, this was an important development but still not a eureka moment. our
goal always was to find some exciting physics rather than just observing ultrathin films in a microscope.
Within a couple of days after oleg prompted the use of Scotch tape, kostya
was already using silver paint to make electrical contacts to graphite platelets
transferred from the Scotch tape. to our surprise, they turned out to be
highly conductive and even the painted contacts exhibited a reasonably low
resistance. the electronic properties could be studied, but we felt it was too
early to put the ugly-looking devices (see fig. 2d) in a cryostat for proper
measurements. as a next step, we applied voltage, first, through the glass
slides and, a bit later, to the Si wafer, using it as a back gate to check for the
field effect. figure 2 shows a photograph of one of our first devices. the
central part is a graphite crystal that is ~20 nm thick, and its lateral size is
comparable to the diameter of a human hair. to transfer the crystal by tweezers from the tape and 
then make four such closely-spaced contacts by using
just a toothpick and silver paint is the highest level of experimental skill.
these days, not many researchers have fingers green enough to make such
samples. I challenge readers to test their own skills against this benchmark!
the very first hand-made device on glass exhibited a clear efe such that
its resistance could be changed by several per cent. It may sound small and
of marginal importance but, aware of how hard it was previously to detect
any efe at all, I was truly shocked. If those ugly devices made by hand from
relatively big and thick platelets already showed some field effect, what
could happen, I thought, if we were to use our thinnest crystallites and apply
the full arsenal of microfabrication facilities? there was a click in my head
that we had stumbled onto something really exciting. this was my eureka
moment.
What followed was no longer a random walk. from this point, it was
only logical to continue along the same path by improving procedures for
cleaving and finding thinner and thinner crystals and making better and
better devices, which we did. It was both painstaking and incredibly rapid,
depending on one’s viewpoint. It took several months until we learned how
to identify monolayers by using optical and atomic force microscopy. on the
microfabrication side, we started using electron-beam lithography to define
proper hall bar devices and started making contacts by metal evaporation
rather than silver painting. the microfabrication development was led by
dubonos, aided by his phd student anatoly firsov. Initially, they employed
facilities in Chernogolovka but, when our new postdoc yuan Zhang got fully
acquainted with the recently-installed lithography system at our nanotech
Centre, the process really speeded up.
the move from multilayers to monolayers and from hand-made to
lithography devices was conceptually simple but never straightforward. We
took numerous detours and wasted much effort on ideas that only led us into
dead ends. an example of grand plans that never worked out was the idea
to plasma-etch graphite mesas in the form of hall bars which, after cleavage,
would provide readily shaped devices, or so I thought. later, we had to
return to the unprocessed graphite. the teething problems we experienced
at that time can also be illustrated by the fact that initially we believed that
Si wafers should have a very precise thickness of oxide (within several nm)
to allow hunting for monolayers. these days we can find graphene on practically any substrate. 
Crystal sizes also went up from a few microns to nearly a
millimetre, just by tinkering with procedures and using different sources of
graphite.
the most essential part of our 2004 report [27] was the electrical measurements, and this required 
a lot of work. for several months, kostya and Serge
morozov were measuring full time, and I was around as well, discussing and
analysing raw data, often as soon as they appeared on the screen. the feedback to our microfabrication 
guys was almost instantaneous. as always in the
case of encountering a new system where one does not know what to expect,
we had to be particularly careful in those first experiments. We disregarded
any curve, unless it was reproducible for many devices and, to avoid any premature conclusions, 
we studied more than 50 ultra-thin devices. those were
years of hard work compressed into just a few months, but we were excited
as every new device got better and better, and we could work 24x7, which
typically meant fourteen hour days and no breaks for the weekends.
finally, by the end of 2003, we got a reliable experimental picture ready
for publication. between that moment and the end of my timeline when the
Science paper was accepted in September 2004, there is a lengthy gap. those
nine months were consumed by excruciating efforts to publish the results in
a high-profile journal. We continuously added data and polished the presentation. Irina’s help was 
invaluable in this time-consuming process, which can
be fully appreciated only by those readers who ever published in such glossy
journals. first, we submitted the manuscript to Nature. It was rejected and,
when further information requested by referees was added, rejected again.
according to one referee, our report did “not constitute a sufficient scientific
advance.” Science referees were more generous (or more knowledgeable?),
and the presentation was better polished by that time. In hindsight, I should
have saved the time and nerves by submitting to a second-tier journal, even
though we all felt that the results were ground-breaking. Readers aspiring
to get published in those glossy magazines and having their papers recently
rejected can use this story to cheer up: their papers may also be prize
winning!
defIant exIStenCe
one of the most surprising results of our Science report was the observation
that, after being isolated, atomic planes remained continuous and conductive under ambient conditions. 
even with hindsight, there are many reasons
to be surprised.
first, for many decades researchers studied ultra-thin films, and their
collective experience proves that continuous monolayers are practically impossible to 
make (see, e.g., [28,29]). try to evaporate a metal film a few nm
in thickness, and you will find it discontinuous. the material coagulates into
tiny islands. this process, called island growth, is universal and driven by the
fact that a system tries to minimise its surface energy. even by using epitaxial
substrates that provide an interaction working against the surface energy
contribution and cooling them down to liquid-helium T, which prevents
migration of deposited atoms, it is hard to find the right conditions to create
continuous nm thick films, let alone monolayers [28,29].
the second reason to be surprised is that theory unequivocally tells us
that an isolated graphene sheet should be thermodynamically unstable.
Calculations show that ‘graphene is the least stable [carbon] structure
until about 6000 atoms’ [30]. Until ~24,000 atoms (that is, a flat sheet with
a characteristic size of ~25 nm), various 3d configurations are energetically
more favourable than the 2d geometry [30,31]. for larger sizes, theory shows
again that a graphene sheet is unstable but now with respect to scrolling.
the latter conclusion is based on considering competing contributions from
the bending and surface energies [32,33]. these calculations are specific to
carbon, but the underlying physics is conceptually connected to the surface
energy mechanism that leads to island growth.
third, 2d crystals cannot be grown in isolation, without an epitaxial
substrate that provides an additional atomic bonding. this follows from the
landau-peierls argument that shows that the density of thermal fluctuations
for a 2d crystal in the 3d space diverges with temperature [1]. although the
divergence is only logarithmic, crystal growth normally requires high T such
that atoms become sufficiently mobile. this also implies a softer lattice with
little shear rigidity. the combination of the two conditions sets a limit on possible sizes L of 
2d atomic crystals. one can estimate L as ~aexp(E/TG) where
a ~1Å is the lattice spacing, E~1eV the atomic bond energy and TG the growth
temperature. this consideration should not be applied to graphene at room
T, which would yield astronomical sizes. TG is usually comparable to the
bond energy, which renders the disorder-generating mechanism irrelevant
at much lower T. note that, in principle, self-assembly may allow growth of
graphene at room T but, so far, this has been achieved only for nm-sized
graphene sheets [34].
the fourth and probably the most important reason to be surprised is that
graphene remains stable under ambient conditions. Surfaces of materials
can react with air and moisture, and monolayer graphene has not one but
two surfaces, making it more reactive. Surface science research involves ultrahigh vacuum facilities and, 
often, liquid-helium T to keep surfaces stable
and away from reactive species. for example, gold is one of the most inert
materials in nature but, even for au, it is hard to avoid its near-surface layer
being partially oxidised in air. What then are the chances for a monolayer
exposed to ambient conditions to remain unaffected?
Graphene flouts all the above considerations. It is instructive to analyse
how. first, any existing method of obtaining graphene starts with 3d rather
than 2d growth. Graphene sheets are initially formed either within the
bulk or on top of an epitaxial substrate, which quenches the diverging
thermal fluctuations. the interaction can be relatively weak, as in the case of
graphene grown on graphite [35], but it is always present. this allows graphene to dodge the landau-peierls 
argument and, also, to avoid coagulation
into islands and 3d carbon structures. Second, if graphene is cleaved or
released from a substrate, the process is normally carried out at room T so
that energy barriers remain sufficiently high. this allows atomic planes to
persist in an isolated, non-scrolled form without any substrate [36], even
though this is energetically unfavourable. If placed on a substrate, the van
der Waals interaction may also be sufficient to prevent a graphene sheet
from scrolling. third, graphite is even more chemically inert than gold.
although graphene is more reactive than graphite and weakly reacts with
air and pollutants at room T, this does not destroy its crystal lattice and high
conductivity [37,38]. It requires T twice as high as room T to irreversibly
damage graphene in air. our ambient conditions appear fortuitous enough
for the graphene lattice to survive.
ReQUIem foR bRIllIant IdeaS
Science literature is full of brilliant ideas that did not work. Searching the
literature for those is not a good idea at all. at a start of a new project, a
couple of decent reviews usually do the job of making sure that one does
not reinvent the wheel. the alternative can be truly detrimental. I have
met many promising researchers who later failed to live up to their promise
because they wasted their time on searching literature, instead of spending
it on searching for new phenomena. What’s more, after months of literature
search, they inevitably came to the same conclusion: everything they planned
had been done before. therefore, they saw no reason to try their own ideas
and, consequently, began a new literature search. one should realise that
ideas are never new. however brilliant, every idea is always based on previous
knowledge and, with so many smart people around, the odds are that some
one somewhere had already thought of something similar before. this
should not be used as an excuse for not trying because local circumstances
vary and, moreover, facilities change with time. new technologies offer a
reasonable chance that old failed ideas may work unpredictably well the next
time round.
In 2002–2003, the merged thought clouds that I would not even call a
brilliant idea were sufficient to instigate the project. they also provided
us with an ariadne’s thread that helped with choosing specific directions.
literature search was done in due course, after we roughly scouted the new
area and especially when the results were being prepared for publication. In
addition to the literature relevant to the thought clouds, our Science paper
cited the challenges of obtaining isolated 2d crystals, their thermodynamic
instability, the observation of nanoscrolls and papers on epitaxial growth.
those references were important to show the experimental progress we
achieved. the first review of earlier literature was done in our 2007 progress
article [1]. Since then, I updated my conference presentations whenever
a historically important paper came to light. this is the first opportunity
to update the history chapter in writing by adding several new references.
furthermore, my recent call for further historical insights [39] was answered
by a number of researchers and, for completeness, I want to acknowledge
their early ideas and contributions, too.
GRaphene InCaRnatIonS
looking back at graphene history, we should probably start with an observation by the british chemist 
benjamin brodie [40]. In 1859, by exposing
graphite to strong acids, he obtained what he called ‘carbonic acid’ (figure
3a). brodie believed that he discovered ‘graphon’, a new form of carbon with
a molecular weight of 33. today we know that he observed a suspension of
tiny crystals of graphene oxide, that is, graphene sheets densely covered with
hydroxyl and epoxide groups [41]. over the next century, there were quite
a few papers describing the laminated structure of graphite oxide, but the
next crucial step in graphene history was the proof that this ‘carbonic acid’
consisted of floating atomic planes. In 1948, G. Ruess and f. Vogt used
transmission electron microscopy (tem) and, after drying a droplet of a
graphene-oxide suspension on a tem grid, they observed creased flakes
down to a few nm in thickness [42]. these studies were continued by the
group of Ulrich hofmann. In 1962, he and hanns-peter boehm looked for
the thinnest possible fragments of reduced graphite oxide and identified
some of them as monolayers [43] (figure 3b).
this remarkable observation received little attention until 2009–2010.
I have to mention that the 1962 identification relied on a relative tem
contrast, an approach that would not stand today’s scrutiny because the
contrast strongly depends on focusing conditions [44]. for example, Rahul
nair and I tried but predictably failed to distinguish between monolayers
and somewhat thicker flakes by using only their tem contrast. Graphene
monolayers were unambiguously identified in tem only forty years after the
1962 paper by counting the number of folding lines [45–47]. nonetheless,
the boehm-hofmann work should, in my opinion, stand as the first observation of graphene because 
monolayers should have been present among
the residue, and the idea was correct. furthermore, it was boehm and his
colleagues who in 1986 introduced the term graphene, deriving it from the
combination of the word ‘graphite’ and the suffix that refers to polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons [48].
In addition to the tem observations, another important line in pre-2004
graphene research was its epitaxial growth. Ultra-thin graphitic films and,
sometimes, even monolayers were grown on metal substrates [49–53],
insulating carbides [54–57] and graphite [35] (see fig. 3d). the first papers
I am aware of go back to 1970 when john Grant reported graphitic films on
Ru and Rh [49] and blakely et al. on ni [50]. epitaxial growth on insulating
substrates was first demonstrated by van bommel et al. in 1975 [54] whereas
Figure 3. prehistory of graphene. a – Graphene as probably seen by brodie 150 years ago.
Graphite oxide at the bottom of the container dissolves in water making the yellow suspension of 
floating graphene flakes. b – tem image of ultra-thin graphitic flakes from the
early 1960s (copied with permission from ref. [43]). c – Scanning electron microscopy
(Sem) image of thin graphite platelets produced by cleavage (similar to images reported
in ref. [60]). d – Stm of graphene grown on pt (copied with permission from ref. [53]).
the image is 100x100 nm2 in size. the hexagonal superstructure has a period of ~22 Å and
appears due to the interaction of graphene with the metal substrate.
Chuhei oshima found other carbides allowing graphene growth (for
example, tiC) [55]. the grown films were usually analysed by surface
science techniques that average over large areas and say little about the film’s
continuity and quality. occasionaly, Stm was also used for visualisation and
local analysis.
even more relevant were earlier attempts to obtain ultra-thin films of
graphite by cleavage, similar to what we did in 2003. In 1990, heinrich kurz’s
group reported ‘peeling optically thin layers with transparent tape’ (read
Scotch tape), which were then used to study carrier dynamics in graphite
[58]. In 1995, thomas ebbesen and hidefumi hiura described few-nm-thick
‘origami’ visualised by atomic force microscopy (afm) on top of hopG
[59]. Rod Ruoff also photographed thin graphite platelets in Sem [60] (fig.
3c). In 2003, monolayers were reported by yang Gan who used Stm for their
cleavage on top of hopG [61].
finally, there were electrical studies of thin graphite films. between 1997
and 2000, yoshiko ohashi succeeded in cleaving crystals down to ~20 nm in
thickness, studied their electrical properties including Shubnikov – de haas
oscillations and, quite remarkably, observed the electric field effect with
resistivity changes of up to 8% [62,63]. also, ebbesen’s group succeeded in
growth of micron-sized graphitic disks with thickness down to 60 layers and
measured their electrical properties [64].
as for theory, let me make only a short note (for more references, see
[1,65]). theoretically, graphene (‘a monolayer of graphite’) was around
since 1947 when phil Wallace first calculated its band structure as a starting
point to understanding the electronic properties of bulk graphite [66].
Gordon Semenoff and duncan haldane realised that graphene could
provide a nice condensed-matter analogue of (2+1)-dimensional quantum
electrodynamics [67,68] and, since then, the material served as a toy model
to address various questions of Qed (see, e.g., [69,70]). many of the theories
became relevant to experiment well before 2004, when electronic properties
of carbon nanotubes (rolled-up graphene ribbons) were investigated. a large
amount of important theoretical work on graphene was done by tsuneya
ando, and millie dresselhaus and co-workers (see, e.g., [71–73]).
to complete the history of graphene, let me also acknowledge some
earlier ideas. thomas ebbesen and hidefumi hiura envisaged a possibility
of graphene-based nanoelectronics in 1995 (as an example, they referred
to epitaxial graphene grown on tiC) [59]. In patent literature, speculations
about “field effect transistors employing pyrolytic graphite” go back as far as
1970 [74]. also, it was pointed out to me by Rod Ruoff and Reginald little
that their pre-2004 papers discussed possibilities and mentioned an intention
of obtaining isolated monolayers [60,75]. finally, the layered structure of
graphite was known since early days of x-ray crystallography, and researchers certainly have been 
aware of graphite being a deck of weakly bonded
graphene planes for an even longer time. this property has been widely used
to create a variety of intercalated graphite compounds [23] and, of course,
to make drawings. after all, we now know that isolated monolayers can be
found in every pencil trace, if one searches carefully enough in an optical
microscope [2]. Graphene has literally been before our eyes and under our
noses for many centuries but was never recognised for what it really is.
Πλανήτη GRaphene
the reader may find some of the cited ideas and historical papers irrelevant,
but I tried my best to avoid any pre-2004 result, especially experimental,
being overlooked. all the mentioned studies poked in the right direction,
but there were no big surprises to spark a graphene gold rush. this is
probably because the earlier experiments had one thing in common. they
were observational. they observed ultra-thin graphitic films, and occasionaly
even monolayers without reporting any of graphene’s distinguishing properties. the very few 
electrical and optical measurements cited above were done
using thin films of graphite and could not assess the physics that graphene
has brought to the fore since 2004.
our Science paper provided a clear watershed. of course, the article
reported the isolation of graphene crystals large enough to do all sorts
of measurements, beyond the observation in an electron or scanning
probe microscope. the method of graphene isolation and identification it
described was so straightforward and accessible that even schoolchildren
could probably do it. this was important but, if we were to stop there, just
with the observations, our work would only add to the previous literature
and, I believe, disappear into oblivion. It is not the observation and isolation
of graphene but its electronic properties that took researchers by surprise.
our measurements delivered news well beyond the Scotch tape technique,
which persuaded many researchers to join in the graphene rush.
first, the 2004 paper reported an ambipolar electric field effect, in which
resistivity changed by a factor of ~100. this is thousands of times more than
the few per cent changes observed previously for any metallic system and
amounted to a qualitative difference. to appreciate the exquisiteness of this
observation, imagine a nanometre thick au film. no matter what you do
with such a film by physical means, it will remain a normal metal with the
same properties. In contrast, properties of graphene can be altered by simply
varying the gate voltage. We can tune graphene from a state close to a normal
metal with electrons in concentration ~1021 cm–3 to a metal with a similar
concentration of holes, all the way through a ‘semiconducting’ state with few
charge carriers.
even more remarkably, our devices exhibited an astonishing electronic
quality. Graphene was completely unprotected from the environment, as
it was placed on a microscopically rough substrate and covered from both
sides with adsorbates and a polymer residue. Still, electrons could travel
submicron distances without scattering, flouting all the elements outside.
this level of electronic quality is completely counterintuitive. It contradicts
the common wisdom that surface science requires ultra-high vacuum and,
even then, thin films become progressively poorer in quality as their thickness
decreases. even with hindsight, such electronic quality is mystifying and, in
fact, not fully understood so far.
In semiconductor physics, electronic quality is described in terms of
charge carrier mobility µ. our Science paper reported graphene with
room-T µ ≈10,000 cm2/Vs (as of 2010, µ can be 10 and 100 times higher
at room and low T, respectively [76,77]). for a general reader, 10,000 may
sound like just another number. to explain its significance, let us imagine
that in 2004 we made devices from, for example, reduced graphene oxide,
which exhibits µ ~1cm2/Vs due to its irreversibly damaged crystal lattice [78].
In our second paper on graphene [79], we reported 2d dichalcogenides with
equally low µ. Since then, there has been little interest in them. the reported
ballistic transport over submicron distances was essential to spark interest in
graphene and to allow the observation of many quantum effects reported
both in 2004 and later. this would have been impossible if graphene exhibited
µ below several 1,000 cm2/Vs.
If not for graphene’s high quality and tunability, there would be no new
physics and, therefore, no graphene boom. In this respect, graphene history has something in 
common with that of solar planets. ancient Greeks
observed them and called them wandering stars, πλανήτες. after the physics
behind this wandering was discovered, people started perceiving planets
quite differently from πλανήτες. Similarly, during the last six years people
discovered what graphene really is, which completely changed the earlier
perception. our Science paper offered the first glimpse of graphene in its new
avatar as a high quality 2d electronic system and beyond.
maGIC of flat CaRbon
What is this new incarnation? for me, 2004 was only the starting point for
the unveiling of many unique properties of graphene. Since then, we have
demonstrated that charge carriers in graphene are massless fermions
described by a dirac-like equation rather than by the standard Schrödinger
equation [80]. In bilayer graphene, electrons receive yet another makeup
as massive dirac fermions [81]. these properties were unveiled by the
observation of two new types of the integer quantum hall effect, which
corresponded to the two types of dirac fermions [1,65]. We also found
that graphene remained metallic in the limit of no charge carriers, even
when just a few electrons remained present in a micron-sized device [1,77].
our experiments have revealed that graphene exhibits a universal optical
conductivity of πe2/2h, such that its visible opacity is just πα, where α is
the fine structure constant [82]. We suggested that the phenomenon of
klein tunnelling, which was known in relativistic quantum physics for many
decades but assumed non-observable, could be probed using graphene
devices [83]. Several groups later demonstrated this experimentally. We were
lucky to be slightly quicker than others in showing that bilayer graphene was
a tuneable-gap semiconductor [84] and that graphene could be carved into
devices on a true nm scale [85]. We demonstrated sensors capable of detecting
individual molecules, more sensitive than any sensor before [38]. We suggested
that strain in graphene creates pseudo-magnetic fields that alter its electronic properties [86] 
and later discussed the possibility of creating uniform
pseudo-fields and observation of the quantum hall effect without an
external magnetic field [87]. pseudo-magnetic fields in excess of 400 t were
reported experimentally half a year later. We made the first step into graphene
chemistry by experimentally introducing its derivatives, graphane and
stoichiometric fluorographene [88,89]. this is not even an exhaustive list of
the nice phenomena that we and our collaborators found in graphene and,
of course, many other researchers reported many other beautiful discoveries
that propelled graphene into its new status of a system that can nearly deliver
magic.
ode to one
after reading about the beautiful properties of graphene, the reader may
wonder why many atomic layers stacked on top of each other, as in graphite,
do not exhibit similar properties. of course, any graphitic derivative has
something in common with its parent, but in the case of graphene, differences between the parent 
and descendants are fundamental. to appreciate
this, let us simplify the task and compare graphene with its bilayer. the
crucial distinctions are already there.
first, graphene exhibits record stiffness and mechanical strength [90]. as
for its bilayer, this strength is jeopardised by the possibility that the two layers
will slide relative to each other. this leads to a principal difference if, for
example, graphene or any thicker platelets are used in composite materials.
Second, graphene chemistry is different depending on whether one or both
surfaces of a monolayer are exposed. for example, atomic hydrogen cannot
bind to graphene from one side but makes a stoichiometric compound
(graphane) if both surfaces are exposed. this makes graphene much more
reactive than its bilayer. third, an electric field is screened in graphite at
distances of about the interlayer separation, and the electric screening
becomes important even for a bilayer. for multilayer graphene, the electric
field can dope no more than a couple of near-surface atomic planes, leaving
the bulk unaffected. this makes it naïve to speculate about the use of graphitic multilayers in 
active electronics. fourth, charge carriers in a monolayer
are massless dirac fermions whereas they are massive in a graphene bilayer.
this leads to essential differences in many electronic properties including
Shubnikov-de haas oscillations, quantum hall effect, klein tunnelling and
so on. the Sorites paradox refers to a moment when a heap is no longer a
heap if the grains are removed one by one. for graphene, even its bilayer is
so different that two already make a heap.
to ColleaGUeS and fRIendS
our Science report was a collective effort, and I would again – on behalf of
kostya and myself – like to thank all the other contributors. Serge morozov
was and remains our ‘multitasking measurement machine’ working 24x7
when in manchester. his electrical measurement skills are unmatched, and
I know that any curve he brings in is completely reliable and no questions
are ever asked whether this and that was checked and crosschecked. da
jiang was around from the very start, and it is unfortunate that I had to take
the project away from him because it was beyond the scope of a single new
phd student. Sergey dubonos and yuan Zhang were the ones who made all
the devices without which our work would obviously have been impossible. I
utterly regret that our life trajectories have later diverged and, especially, that
Sergey has switched from microfabrication technology to goat farming. I also
acknowledge help of anatoly firsov in making those devices. Irina Grigorieva
helped with scanning electron microscopy but, more importantly, with
writing up the 2004 manuscript.
Figure 4. those who made our first graphene paper possible but did not get the prize.
the end of my timeline was only a start for further hard work involving
many collaborators. our rapid progress would be impossible without misha
katsnelson who provided us with all the theoretical help an experimentalist
can only dream of. Since 2006, I have been enjoying collaboration with
other great theory guys including antonio Castro neto, paco Guinea, nuno
peres, Volodya fal’ko, leonid levitov, allan macdonald, dima abanin, tim
Wehling and their co-workers. In particular, I want to acknowledge many
illuminating discussions and banter over dinners with antonio and paco.
as for experimentalists, the list is longer and includes philip kim, ernie
hill, andrea ferrari, eva andrei, alexey kuzmenko, Uschi bangert, Sasha
Grigorenko, Uli Zeitler, jannik meyer, marek potemskii and many of their
colleagues.
philip deserves special praise. In august 2004, before our Science paper
was published, his group submitted another important paper [91]. his
report described electronic properties of ultra-thin graphite platelets (down
to ~35 layers). except for the thicker devices, philip’s group followed the
same route as our now-celebrated paper. how close he was can be judged
from the fact that, after adopting the Scotch tape technique, philip started
studying monolayers in early 2005. this allowed him to catch up quickly and,
in mid-2005, our two groups submitted independent reports that appeared
back-to-back in Nature, both describing the all-important observation of dirac
fermions in monolayer graphene [80,92]. later, I had the pleasure of closely
working with philip on two joint papers, for Science and Scientific American. for
me personally, those back-to-back Nature papers signified a watershed. people
within the large semiconducting community no longer rumoured that ‘the
results were as difficult to reproduce as those by hendrik Schön’, and friends
no longer stopped me in corridors with ‘be more careful; you know …’ I owe
philip a great deal for this, and many people heard me saying – before and
after the nobel prize – that I would be honoured to share it with him.
last but not least, let me acknowledge many bright young, and not so
young, colleagues: peter blake, Rahul nair, Roman Gorbachev, leonid
ponomarenko, fred Schedin, daniel elias, Sasha mayorov, Rui yang, Vasyl
kravets, Zhenhua ni, Wencai Ren, Rashid jalil, Ibtsam Riaz, Soeren neubeck,
tariq mohiuddin and tim booth. they were phd students and postdocs
here in manchester over the last six years and, as always, I avoid using the
feudal word ‘my’.
finally, I acknowledge the financial support of epSRC in its best, that is,
the responsive mode. this nobel prize would be absolutely impossible without this mode. let me 
also thank the Royal Society and the leverhulme trust
for reducing my teaching loads, which allowed me to focus on the project.
I have also received funding from the office of naval Research and the air
force office of Scientific Research, which helped us to run even faster. the
körber foundation is gratefully acknowledged for its 2009 award. however,
I can offer no nice words for the eU framework programmes which, except
for the european Research Council, can be praised only by europhobes for
discrediting the whole idea of an effectively working europe.
