Physical Modeling of Earth’s Climate
Nobel Lecture, 8 December 2021 by Syukuro Manabe
Program in Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
it is a great honor to be chosen by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences to receive the 
Nobel Prize established through the generosity and foresight of Mr. Nobel. 
It is likewise a great pleasure to give a talk on global warming, the subject that 
I have enjoyed exploring throughout my career.
On this occasion, I would like thank the late Joseph Smagorinsky, the
inaugural director of the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory of the
U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. It has been a
great privilege and pleasure to work at the Laboratory, unraveling the
secrets of climate change.
Today, I would like to discuss the role of greenhouse gases in climate
change, using relatively simple climate models that we constructed prior
to 1990. I begin with an explanation of the so-called greenhouse effect in
the atmosphere.
The energy balance of our planet is maintained between net incoming solar shortwave 
radiation and outgoing longwave radiation at the top of the atmosphere. According to 
satellite observation, the globally averaged value of outgoing longwave radiation is ~240 Wm–2. 
Assuming that the Earth-atmosphere system radiates as a blackbody according to 
the Stefan-Boltzmann law of blackbody radiation, one can estimate the effective 
emission temperature of the planet.
Temperature thus obtained is –18.7C, which is colder than +14.7C, the global 
mean temperature of the Earth’s surface. This implies that the Earth’s surface is warmer 
than it would be in the absence of the atmosphere by as much as 33C. In other words, 
the atmosphere has so-called greenhouse effect that increases the temperature of 
the Earth’s surface by as much as 33C. It is the satellite observation of outgoing 
longwave radiation that has provided the most convincing evidence for the existence 
of the greenhouse effect of the atmosphere.
The figureon next page was designed to illustrate schematically the thermal structure 
and the greenhouse effect of the atmosphere. The slanted line indicates schematically 
the idealized, vertical temperature profile of the troposphere, where temperature 
decreases almost linearly with height. The vertical line segment above the slanted line 
illustrates schematically the almost isothermal lower stratosphere. The dot in the middle 
troposphere indicates the effective emission center of the outgoing radiation from the top 
of the atmosphere. Its temperature is –18.7C, which may be compared with +14.7C, the global 
mean temperature of the Earth’s surface. The latter is warmer than the former by about 33C, 
indicating the magnitude of the greenhouse effect of the atmosphere.
Radiative transfer from the Earth’s surface and in the atmosphere obeys Kirkhoff’s law. 
It requires that, for a given wavelength, the
Figure 4. Temperature of Planetary Emission.
56 THE NOBEL PRIZES
absorptivity
of a substance is equal to its emissivity, which is defined as
the ratio of the actual emission to the theoretical emission from a blackbody.
Because Earth’s surface behaves almost as a blackbody, it has an
absorptivity that is close to one, absorbing almost completely the downward
flux of longwave and shortwave radiation that reaches it. In keeping
with Kirkhoff’s law, the Earth’s surface emits an upward flux of longwave
radiation almost as a blackbody would. As this upward flux penetrates
into the atmosphere, it is depleted due to the absorption by greenhouse
gases such as water vapor, carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, and methane,
but it is also accreted because of the emission from these gases. In short,
the upward flux decreases or increases with height, depending on
whether the depletion is larger than accretion or vice versa.
Although these greenhouse gases are minor constituents of the atmosphere,
as a whole they absorb a major fraction of the upward flux of
blackbody radiation emitted by the Earth’s surface. On the other hand,
the atmosphere also emits the upward flux of longwave radiation. Since
Kirkhoff’s law requires the absorptivity of the atmosphere to be equal to
its emissivity, the absorption of the upward flux emitted by the relatively
warm Earth’s surface is substantially larger than the emission of the
upward flux by the relatively cold atmosphere. Thus, the atmosphere
traps a substantial fraction of the upward flux of longwave radiation emitted by 
the Earth’s surface before it reaches the top of the atmosphere, thereby keeping 
the Earth’s surface warm and habitable.
So far, I have explained why the atmosphere has a so-called greenhouse effect that 
traps a substantial fraction of the upward flux of longwave radiation emitted by 
the Earth’s surface. Now I shall explain why temperature increases not only at 
the Earth’s surface but also in the troposphere as the concentration of a greenhouse gas 
increases in the atmosphere.
If a greenhouse gas such as carbon dioxide increases in the atmosphere, the infrared 
opacity of air increases, making it harder for the radiation emitted from 
the lower layer to reach the top of the atmosphere. Consequently, the average height of the layer, 
from which the outgoing longwave radiation originates, increases as the concentration of 
greenhouse gas increases in the atmosphere. In short, the more opaque the atmosphere is, 
the higher is the effective center of the upward flux that reaches the top of the atmosphere. 
Since the effective center (A) of the outgoing radiation is located in the troposphere, where temperature
decreases with increasing height, the temperature of the center decreases
as it moves upward, thereby reducing the outgoing radiation from the top
of the atmosphere.
The change in the concentration of greenhouse gas affects not only the
outgoing longwave radiation from the top of the atmosphere but also the
downward flux that reaches the Earth’s surface. If the concentration of
greenhouse gas increases in the atmosphere, the infrared opacity of air
increases, making it harder for the radiation from the higher layer of the
atmosphere to reach the Earth’s surface. Consequently, there is a downward
shift of the effective center (B) of the downward flux, as the concentration
of greenhouse gas increases in the atmosphere. In short, the more
opaque the atmosphere is, the lower is the emission center of the downward
flux that reaches the Earth’s surface. Because temperature increases
with decreasing height in the troposphere, the temperature at the center
also increases as it moves downward, thereby increasing the downward
flux that reaches the Earth’s surface.
The radiative response of the surface-troposphere system to an
increase in greenhouse gas can be regarded as the net result of two
related processes. The first process involves the increase in the downward
flux of longwave radiation that increases the temperature of the Earth’s
surface. Over a sufficiently long period of time, the Earth’s surface returns
to the overlying troposphere practically all the radiative energy it receives,
with thermal energy being transferred upward through moist and dry
convection, longwave radiation, and large-scale circulation in the atmosphere.
Thus, temperature increases not only at the Earth’s surface but
also in the overlying troposphere.
The second process involves the upward flux of longwave radiation at
the top of the atmosphere in response to an increase in atmospheric concentration
of greenhouse gas. If the amount of greenhouse gas were to
increase without allowing the temperature of the surface–troposphere
system to change, the upward flux of longwave radiation at the top of the
atmosphere would decrease, as explained earlier. To maintain the radiative
heat balance of the planet as a whole, the surface-troposphere system
warms just enough for the effect of these two processes to balance, such
that the top-of-atmosphere flux of outgoing radiation remains unchanged
despite the warming. The global scale increase of the overall temperature
of the surface-troposphere system is often called global warming.
An important factor that affects the magnitude of global warming is
the positive feedback process that involves water vapor, which absorbs
and emits strongly over much of the spectral range of terrestrial longwave
radiation and is mainly responsible for the powerful greenhouse effect of
the atmosphere. As we know, the absolute humidity of air usually
increases with increasing temperature, thereby increasing the greenhouse
effect of the atmosphere. The positive feedback effect between temperature and the greenhouse 
effect of the atmosphere is called ‘water vapor feedback’. It magnifies the global warming 
that is induced by long-lived greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide.
In the mid-1960s we developed a one-dimensional, vertical column model of the atmosphere, 
in which heat balance in the atmosphere and the Earth’s surface are maintained through 
close interaction between radiative and convective heat transfer. The model tuned out to 
be very useful for evaluating how temperature changes at the Earth’s surface and in the atmosphere 
in response to the change in the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide.
Using this model, we obtained the vertical temperature profile of the atmosphere in 
radiative-convective equilibrium not only for the normal concentration of the atmosphere, 
300 ppm by volume, but also for two other concentrations, 150 ppm and 600 ppm. 
The above figure shows vertical temperature profiles of the coupled atmosphere-earth surface system, 
in radiative-convective equilibrium, which are obtained for these three concentrations. 
As explained already, the temperature increases not only at the Earth’s surface but also in 
the troposphere as the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide doubles from 150 
to 300 ppm and 300 to 600 ppm, whereas it decreases in the stratosphere.
Figure 7. Radiative-Convective Equilibrium. Manabe & Wetherald, 1967.
60 THE NOBEL PRIZES
The magnitude of the warming in the troposphere is 2.3C in both cases
and is practically identical in both cases.
To evaluate quantitatively the influence of the water vapor feedback
upon the simulated warming, we conducted another set of runs in which
the water vapor feedback was disabled. In these runs, the distribution of
absolute humidity was prescribed to remain unchanged rather than being
adjusted to maintain a constant relative humidity. From the difference
among the three states of radiative-convective equilibrium thus obtained,
we estimated the magnitude of the equilibrium response of surface temperature
in the absence of water vapor feedback. We found that surface
temperature increases by approximately 1.3C in response to the doubling
of atmospheric carbon dioxide. It is much smaller than 2.3C that we got in
the presence of the water vapor feedback. These experiments indicate
that water vapor has a powerful feedback effect that magnifies surface
temperature change by a substantial factor.
The one-dimensional, radiative-convective model was developed as an
important step towards the development of the three-dimensional, general
circulation model of the atmosphere, which in turn evolved into a
coupled atmosphere-ocean model.
In the box diagram shown here, the coupled model consists of three
major components, which are the general circulation model of the atmosphere,
that of the ocean, and a simple, heat and water balance model of
the continental surface. Although the initial version of the coupled model
was constructed in the late 1960s, it took two more decades before the
coupled model with realistic geography became ready for the global
warming experiment conducted in the late 1980s. The result from the
experiment was published in the late 1980s and was discussed extensively
in the first report of the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change
published in 1990. For further details of this study, see our book Beyond
Global Warming, recently published by Princeton University Press.
Figure 8. Surface Temperature Change due to CO2 doubling.
Global warming involves changes not only in temperature but also in the rate of 
evaporation and that of precipitation. If a greenhouse gas such as water vapor or 
carbon dioxide increases in the atmosphere, the downward flux of longwave radiation 
increases at the Earth’s surface as explained already, thereby increasing 
the temperature of the Earth’s surface. Since the saturation vapor pressure at a wet surface 
(e.g., ocean) increases with rising surface temperature, it is expected that 
the rate of evaporation from the Earth’s surface also increases, so long as 
the relative humidity of the overlying atmosphere does not change systematically. 
Given sufficient time, a global-scale increase in the rate of evaporation results 
in a corresponding increase in the rate of precipitation, thereby increasing 
the strength of the global water cycle.
Global warming involves not only the global mean rates of precipitation and 
evaporation but also their geographical distributions, due mainly to the increase 
in the rate of horizontal transport of water vapor by large-scale circulation in the atmosphere. 
When temperature increases in the atmosphere in response to the increase in the concentration of long-lived
Figure 9. Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere-Land Model. Manabe & Bryan, 1969.
Figure 10. Acceleration of Hydrologic Cycle.
62 THE NOBEL PRIZES
greenhouse gas such as carbon dioxide, it is expected that the absolute
humidity of air increases, keeping the relative humidity of air unchanged
through precipitation. Thus, it is expected that horizontal transport of
water vapor by large scale circulation also increases in the atmosphere.
This is the main reason why the distribution of precipitation changes differently
from that of evaporation as global warming proceeds, affecting
substantially the distribution of water availability such as the rate of river
discharge and the amount of soil moisture at the continental surface.
For example, precipitation usually increases in many water-rich
regions in high northern latitudes and heavily precipitating regions of the
tropics, increasing river discharge and frequency of floods. In contrast,
soil moisture usually decreases in many relatively arid regions in the subtropics
and other water-poor regions that are relatively dry, increasing the
frequency of drought.
The implied amplification of existing difference in water availability between 
water-poor and water-rich regions presents a very serious challenge to the 
water-resources managers of the world.
Thank you very much.
