Werner Heisenberg
The development of quantum mechanics
Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1933
Quantum mechanics, on which I am to speak here, arose, in its formal content, 
from the endeavour to expand Bohr's principle of correspondence to
a complete mathematical scheme by refining his assertions. The physically
new viewpoints that distinguish quantum mechanics from classical physics
were prepared by the researches of various investigators engaged in analysing
the difficulties posed in Bohr's theory of atomic structure and in the radiation theory of light.
In 1900, through studying the law of black-body radiation which he had
discovered, Planck had detected in optical phenomena a discontinuous phenomenon totally 
unknown to classical physics which, a few years later, was
most precisely expressed in Einstein's hypothesis of light quanta. The impossibility of 
harmonizing the Maxwellian theory with the pronouncedly
visual concepts expressed in the hypothesis of light quanta subsequently
compelled research workers to the conclusion that radiation phenomena can
only be understood by largely renouncing their immediate visualization. The
fact, already found by Planck and used by Einstein, Debye, and others, that
the element of discontinuity detected in radiation phenomena also plays an
important part in material processes, was expressed systematically in Bohr's
basic postulates of the quantum theory which, together with the BohrSommerfeld quantum 
conditions of atomic structure, led to a qualitative
interpretation of the chemical and optical properties of atoms. The acceptance of these 
basic postulates of the quantum theory contrasted uncompromisingly with the application of 
classical mechanics to atomic systems,
which, however, at least in its qualitative affirmations, appeared indispensable for 
understanding the properties of atoms. This circumstance was a fresh
argument in support of the assumption that the natural phenomena in which
Planck's constant plays an important part can be understood only by largely
foregoing a visual description of them. Classical physics seemed the limiting
case ofvisualization of a fundamentally unvisualizable microphysics, the more
accurately realizable the more Planck's constant vanishes relative to the
parameters of the system. This view of classical mechanics as a limiting case
of quantum mechanics also gave rise to Bohr's principle of correspondence
which, at least in qualitative terms, transferreda number of conclusions formulated in 
classical mechanics to quantum mechanics. In connection with
the principle of correspondence there was also discussion whether the quantum-mechanical laws 
could in principle be of a statistical nature; the possibility became particularly apparent in 
Einstein's derivation of Planck's law
of radiation. Finally, the analysis of the relation between radiation theory
and atomic theory by Bohr, Kramers, and Slater resulted in the following
scientific situation:
According to the basic postulates of the quantum theory, an atomic system is capable of 
assuming discrete, stationary states, and therefore discrete
energy values; in terms of the energy of the atom the emission and absorption of light by 
such a system occurs abruptly, in the form of impulses. On
the other hand, the visualizable properties of the emitted radiation are described by a wave field, 
the frequency of which is associated with the difference in energy between the initial and final 
states of the atom by the
relation
E₁-E2=hv
To each stationary state of an atom corresponds a whole complex of parameters which specify 
the probability of transition from this state to another.
There is no direct relation between the radiation classically emitted by an
orbiting electron and those parameters defining the probability of emission;
nevertheless Bohr's principle of correspondence enables a specific term of
the Fourier expansion of the classical path to be assigned to each transition
of the atom, and the probability for the particular transition follows qualitatively similar laws 
as the intensity ofthose Fourier components. Although
therefore in the researches carried out by Rutherford, Bohr, Sommerfeld
and others, the comparison of the atom with a planetary system of electrons
leads to a qualitative interpretation of the optical and chemical properties
of atoms, nevertheless the fundamental dissimilarity between the atomic
spectrum and the classical spectrum of an electron system imposes the need
to relinquish the concept of an electron path and to forego a visual description of the atom.
The experiments necessary to define the electron-path concept also furnish
an important aid in revising it. The most obvious answer to the question
how the orbit of an electron in its path within the atom could be observed
namely, will perhaps be to use a microscope of extreme resolving power.
But since the specimen in this microscope would have to be illuminated with
light having an extremely short wavelength, the first light quantum from
the light source to reach the electron and pass into the observer's eye would
eject the electron completely from its path in accordance with the laws of
the Compton effect. Consequently only one point of the path would be
observable experimentally at any one time.
In this situation, therefore, the obvious policy was to relinquish at first
the concept of electron paths altogether, despite its substantiation by Wilson's experiments, and, 
as it were, to attempt subsequently how much of
the electron-path concept can be carried over into quantum mechanics.
In the classical theory the specification of frequency, amplitude, and phase
of all the light waves emitted by the atom would be fully equivalent to
specifying its electron path. Since from the amplitude and phase of an emitted
wave the coefficients of the appropriate term in the Fourier expansion of
the electron path can be derived without ambiguity, the complete electron
path therefore can be derived from a knowledge ofall amplitudes and phases.
Similarly, in quantum mechanics, too, the whole complex of amplitudes
and phases of the radiation emitted by the atom can be regarded as a complete description of the 
atomic system, although its interpretation in the sense
of an electron path inducing the radiation is impossible. In quantum mechanics, therefore, 
the place of the electron coordinates is taken by a complex
of parameters corresponding to the Fourier coefficients of classical motion
along a path. These, however, are no longer classified by the energy of state
and the number of the corresponding harmonic vibration, but are in each
case associated with two stationary states of the atom, and are a measure for
the transition probability of the atom from one stationary state to another.
A complex of coefficients of this type is comparable with a matrix such as
occurs in linear algebra. In exactly the same way each parameter of classical
mechanics, e.g.the momentum or the energy of the electrons, can then be
assigned a corresponding matrix in quantum mechanics. To proceed from
here beyonda mere description of the empirical state of affairs it was necessary to associate systematically 
the matrices assigned to the various parameters in the same way as the corresponding parameters in 
classical mechanics are associated by equations of motions. When, in the interest of achieving
the closest possible correspondence between classical and quantum mechanics, the addition and 
multiplication of Fourier series were tentatively taken
as the example for the addition and multiplication of the quantum-theory
complexes, the product of two parameters represented by matrices appeared
to be most naturally represented by the product matrix in the sense of linear
algebra-an assumption already suggested by the formalism ofthe KramersLadenburg dispersion theory.
It thus seemed consistent simply to adopt in quantum mechanics the equations of motion of classical physics, 
regarding them as a relation between
the matrices representing the classical variables. The Bohr-Sommerfeld quantum conditions could also 
be re-interpreted ina relation between the matrices, and together with the equations of motion 
they were sufficient to
define all matrices and hence the experimentally observable properties ofthe
atom.
Born, Jordan, and Dirac deserve the credit for expanding the mathematical scheme outlined above 
into a consistent and practically usable theory.
These investigators observed in the first place that the quantum conditions
can be written as commutation relations between the matrices representing
the momenta and the coordinates of the electrons, to yield the equations (pr,
momentum matrices; qr, coordinate matrices):
Prqsqspr= Örs 9rqs-9sqr =0 Prps Pspr=0 2πί
Ors =
( I for r = s
o for rs
By means of these commutation relations they were able to detect in quantum mechanics as well 
the laws which were fundamental to classical mechanics: the invariability in time of energy, 
momentum, and angular momentum.
The mathematical scheme so derived thus ultimately bears an extensive
formal similarity to that of the classical theory, from which it differs outwardly by the 
commutation relations which, moreover, enabled the equations of motion to be derived from the 
Hamiltonian function.
In the physical consequences, however, there are very profound differences between quantum 
mechanics and classical mechanics which impose the
need for a thorough discussion of the physical interpretation of quantum
mechanics. As hitherto defined, quantum mechanics enables the radiation
emitted by the atom, the energy values of the stationary states, and other
parameters characteristic for the stationary states to be treated. The theory
hence complies with the experimental data contained in atomic spectra. In
all those cases, however, where a visual description is required of a transient
event, e.g. when interpreting Wilson photographs,the formalism ofthe theory does not seem to allow 
an adequate representation of the experimental
state of affairs. At this point Schrödinger's wave mechanics, meanwhile developed on the basis of 
de Broglie's theses, came to the assistance of quantum mechanics.
In the course of the studies which Mr. Schrödinger will report here himself he converted the 
determination of the energy values of an atom into an
eigenvalue problem defined by a boundary-value problem in the coordinate
space of the particular atomic system. After Schrödinger had shown the
mathematical equivalence of wave mechanics, which he had discovered,
with quantum mechanics, the fruitful combination of these two different
areas of physical ideas resulted in an extraordinary broadening and enrichment of the formalism 
of the quantum theory. Firstly it was only wave
mechanics which made possible the mathematical treatment of complex
atomic systems, secondly analysis of the connection between the two theories led to what is known 
as the transformation theory developed by Dirac
and Jordan. As it is impossible within the limits ofthe present lecture to give
a detailed discussion of the mathematical structure of this theory, I should
just like to point out its fundamental physical significance. Through the
adoption of the physical principles of quantum mechanics into its expanded
formalism, the transformation theory made it possible in completely general
terms to calculate for atomic systems the probability for the occurrence of a
particular, experimentally ascertainable, phenomenon under given experimental conditions. 
The hypothesis conjectured in the studies on the radiation theory and enunciated in precise terms 
in Born's collision theory, namely that the wave function governs the probability for the presence 
of a corpuscle, appeared to be a special case of a more general pattern of laws and
to be a natural consequence of the fundamental assumptions of quantum
mechanics. Schrödinger, and in later studies Jordan, Klein, and Wigner as
well, had succeeded in developing as far as permitted by the principles of
the quantum theory de Broglie's original concept of visualizable matter
waves occurring in space and time,a concept formulated even before the
development of quantum mechanics. But for that the connection between
Schrödinger's concepts and de Broglie's original thesis would certainly have
seemed a looser one by this statistical interpretation of wave mechanics and
by the greater emphasis on the fact that Schrödinger's theory is concerned
with waves in multidimensional space. Before proceeding to discuss the
explicit significance of quantum mechanics it is perhaps right for me to deal
briefly with this question as to the existence of matter waves in three-dimensional space, 
since the solution to this problem was only achieved by combining wave and quantum mechanics.
A long time before quantum mechanics was developed Pauli had inferred
from the laws in the Periodic System of the elements the well-known principle that a particular 
quantum state can at all times be occupied by only a
single electron. It proved possible to transfer this principle to quantum mechanics on the basis 
ofwhat at first sight seemed a surprising result: the entire
complex of stationary states which an atomic system is capable of adopting
breaks down into definite classes such that an atom in a state belonging to
one class can never change into a state belonging to another class under the
action of whatever perturbations. As finally clarified beyond question by
the studies of Wigner and Hund, such a class of states is characterized by a
definite symmetry characteristic of the Schrödinger eigenfunction with respect to the transposition 
of the coordinates of two electrons. Owing to the
fundamental identity of electrons, any external perturbation of the atom
remains unchanged when two electrons are exchanged and hence causes no
transitions between states of various classes. The Pauli principle and the
Fermi-Dirac statistics derived from it are equivalent with the assumption
that only that class of stationary states is achieved in nature in which the
eigenfunction changes its sign when two electrons are exchanged. According
to Dirac, selecting the symmetrical system of terms would lead not to the
Pauli principle, but to Bose-Einstein electron statistics.
Between the classes of stationary states belonging to the Pauli principle
or to Bose-Einstein statistics, and de Broglie's concept of matter waves
there is a peculiar relation. A spatial wave phenomenon can be treated according to the principles 
of the quantum theory by analysing it using the
Fourier theorem and then applying to the individual Fourier component of
the wave motion, as a system having one degree of freedom, the normal
laws of quantum mechanics. Applying this procedure for treating wave
phenomena by the quantum theory, a procedure that has also proved fruitful in Dirac's studies of 
the theory of radiation, to de Broglie's matter
waves, exactly the same results are obtained as in treating a whole complex
of material particles according to quantum mechanics and selecting the symmetrical system of terms. 
Jordan and Klein hold that the two methods are
mathematically equivalent even if allowance is also made for the interaсtion of the electrons, 
i.e. if the field energy originating from the continuous space charge is included in the calculation 
in de Broglie's wave theory.
Schrödinger's considerations of the energy-momentum tensor assigned to
the matter waves can then also be adopted in this theory as consistent components of the formalism. 
The studies ofJordan and Wigner show that modifying the commutation relations underlying this 
quantum theory of waves
results in a formalism equivalent to that of quantum mechanics based on the
assumption of Pauli's exclusion principle.
These studies have established that the comparison of an atom with a planetary system composed of 
nucleus and electrons is not the only visual picture
of how we can imagine the atom. On the contrary, it is apparently no less
correct to compare the atom with a charge cloud and use the correspondence
to the formalism of the quantum theory borne by this concept tot derive
qualitative conclusions about the behaviour of the atom. However, it is the
concern of wave mechanics to follow these consequences.
Reverting therefore to the formalism of quantum mechanics; its application to physical problems is 
justified partly by the original basic assumptions
of the theory, partly by its expansion in the transformation theory on the
basis of wave mechanics, and the question is now to expose the explicit
significance of the theory by comparing it with classical physics.
In classical physics the aim of research was to investigate objective processes occurring in space 
and time, and to discover the laws governing their
progress from the initial conditions. In classical physics a problem was considered solved when 
a particular phenomenon had been proved to occur
objectively in space and time, and it had been shown to obey the general
rules of classical physics as formulated by differential equations. The manner
in which the knowledge of each process had been acquired, what observations may possibly have led 
to its experimental determination, was completely immaterial, and it was also immaterial for 
the consequences of the classical theory, which possible observations were to verify the predictions 
of the theory. In the quantum theory, however, the situation is completely
different. The very fact that the formalism of quantum mechanics cannot
be interpreted as visual description of a phenomenon occurring in space and
time shows that quantum mechanics is in no way concerned with the objective determination of 
space-time phenomena. On the contrary, the formalism of quantum mechanics should be used in such a way 
that the probability for the outcome of a further experiment may be concluded from the determination 
of an experimental situation in an atomic system, providing
that the system is subject to no perturbations other than those necessitated
by performing the two experiments. The fact that the only definite known
result to be ascertained after the fullest possible experimental investigation
ofthe system is the probability for a certain outcome of a second experiment
shows, however, that each observation must entail a discontinuous change in
the formalism describing the atomic proces sand therefore also a discontinuous change in the physical 
phenomenon itself. Whereas in the classical
theory the kind of observation has no bearing on the event, in the quantum
theory the disturbance associated with each observation of the atomic phenomenon has a decisive role. 
Since, furthermore, the result of an observation
as a rule leads only to assertions about the probability of certain results of
subsequent observations, the fundamentally unverifiable part of each perturbation must, as shown by Bohr, 
be decisive for the non-contradictory
operation of quantum mechanics. This difference between classical and
atomic physics is understandable, of course, since for heavy bodies such as
the planets moving around the sun the pressure of the sunlight which is
reflected at their surface and which is necessary for them to be observed is
negligible; for the smallest building units of matter, however, owing to their
low mass, every observation has a decisive effect on their physical behaviour.
The perturbation of the system to be observed caused by the observation
is also an important factor in determining the limits within which a visual
description of atomic phenomena is possible. If there were experiments
which permitted accurate measurement of all the characteristics of an atomic
system necessary to calculate classical motion, and which, for example, sup
plied accurate values for the location and velocity of each electron in the
system at a particular time, the result of these experiments could not be
utilized at all in the formalism, but rather it would directly contradict the
formalism. Again, therefore, it is clearly that fundamentally unverifiable part
of the perturbation of the system caused by the measurement itself which
hampers accurate ascertainment of the classical characteristics and thus permits quantum mechanics to 
be applied. Closer examination of the formalism shows that between the accuracy with which the location 
of a particle can be ascertained and the accuracy with which its momentum can
simultaneously be known, there is a relation according to which the product
of the probable errors in the measurement of the location and momentum
is invariably at least as large as Planck's constant divided by 47. In a very
general form, therefore, we should have
Дp 4q>h
where p and q are canonically conjugated variables. These uncertainty relations for the results 
of the measurement of classical variables form the necessary conditions for enabling the result of 
a measurement to be expressed
in the formalism of the quantum theory. Bohr has shown in a series of
examples how the perturbation necessarily associated with each observation
indeed ensures that one cannot go below the limit set by the uncertainty
relations. He contends that in the final analysis an uncertainty introduced
by the concept of measurement itselfis responsible for part ofthat perturbation remaining 
fundamentally unknown. The experimental determination
ofwhatever space-time events invariably necessitates a fixed frame - say the
system of coordinates in which the observer is at rest - to which all measurements are referred. 
The assumption that this frame is «fixed» implies
neglecting its momentum from the outset, since «fixed» implies nothing
other, of course, than that any transfer of momentum to it will evoke no
perceptible effect. The fundamentally necessary uncertainty at this point is
then transmitted via the measuring apparatus into the atomic event.
Since in connection with this situation it is tempting to consider the possibility of eliminating 
all uncertainties by amalgamating the object, the measuring apparatuses, and the observer into 
one quantum-mechanical system,
it is important to emphasize that the act of measurement is necessarily visualizable, since, of course, 
physics is ultimately only concerned with the systematic description of space-time processes. 
The behaviour of the observer
as well as his measuring apparatus must therefore be discussed according to
the laws of classical physics, as otherwise there is no further physical problem
whatsoever. Within the measuring apparatus, as emphasized by Bohr, all
events in the sense of the classical theory will therefore be regarded as determined, this also 
being a necessary condition before one can, from a result of
measurements, unequivocally conclude whathas happened. In quantum theory, too, the scheme of 
classical physics which objectifies the results of observation by assuming in space and time 
processes obeying laws is thus carried through up to the point where the fundamental limits are imposed by
the unvisualizable character of the atomic events symbolized by Planck's
constant. A visual description for the atomic events is possible only within
certain limits of accuracy - but within these limits the laws of classical physics also still apply. 
Owing to these limits of accuracy as defined by the uncertainty relations, moreover, a visual picture of 
the atom free from ambiguity has not been determined. On the contrary the corpuscular and the
wave concepts are equally serviceable as a basis for visual interpretation.
The laws of quantum mechanics are basically statistical. Although the
parameters of an atomic system are determined in their entirety by an experiment, the result of a 
future observation of the system is not generally
accurately predictable. But at any later point of time there are observations
which yield accurately predictable results. For the other observations
only the probability for a particular outcome of the experiment can be given.
The degree of certainty which still attaches to the laws of quantum mechanics is, for example, 
responsible for the fact that the principles of conservation for energy and momentum still hold as 
strictly as ever. They can be
checked with any desired accuracy and will then be valid according to the
accuracy with which they are checked. The statistical character of the laws
of quantum mechanics, however, becomes apparent in that an accurate
study of the energetic conditions renders it impossible to pursue at the same
time a particular event in space and time.
For the clearest analysis of the conceptual principles of quantum mechanics we are indebted to Bohr who, 
in particular, applied the concept of complementarity to interpret the validity of the quantum-mechanical laws. 
The
uncertainty relations alone afford an instance of how in quantum mechanics
the exact knowledge of one variable can exclude the exact knowledge of
another. This complementary relationship between different aspects of one
and the same physical process is indeed characteristic for the whole structure
of quantum mechanics. I had just mentioned that, for example, the determination of energetic relations 
excludes the detailed description of spacetime processes. Similarly, the study of the chemical 
properties of a molecule
is complementary to the study of the motions of the individual electrons
in the molecule, or the observation of interference phenomena complementary to the observation of 
individual light quanta. Finally, the areas of validity of classical and quantum mechanics can be 
marked off one from the other
as follows: Classical physics represents that striving to learn about Nature
in which essentially we seek to draw conclusions about objective processes
from observations and so ignore the consideration of the influences which
every observation has on the object to be observed; classicalphysics, therefore,
has its limits at the point from which the influence of the observation on the
event can no longer be ignored. Conversely, quantum mechanics makes possible the treatment of atomic 
processes by partially foregoing their spacetime description and objectification.
So as not to dwell on assertions in excessively abstract terms about the
interpretation of quantum mechanics, I would like briefly to explain with
300 1932 W.HEISENBERG
a well-known example how far it is possible through the atomic theory to
achieve an understanding of the visual processes with which we are concerned in daily life. 
The interest of research workers has frequently been
focused on the phenomenon of regularly shaped crystals suddenly forming
from a liquid, e.g.a supersaturated salt solution. According to the atomic
theory the forming force in this process is to a certain extent the symmetry
characteristic of the solution to Schrödinger's wave equation, and to that
extent crystallization is explained by the atomic theory. Nevertheless this
process retains a statistical and - one might almost say - historical element
which cannot be further reduced: even when the state of the liquid is completely known before 
crystallization, the shape of the crystal is not determined by the laws of quantum mechanics. 
The formation of regular shapes
is just far more probable than that of a shapeless lump. But the ultimate shape
owes its genesis partly to an element of chance which in principle cannot
be analysed further.
Before closing this report on quantum mechanics, I may perhaps be allowed to discuss very briefly 
the hopes that may be attached to the further
development of this branch of research. It would be superfuous to mention
that the development must be continued, based equally on the studies of
de Broglie, Schrödinger, Born, Jordan, and Dirac. Here the attention of the
research workers is primarily directed to the problem of reconciling the
claims of the special relativity theory with those of the quantum theory. The
extraordinary advances made in this field by Dirac about which Mr. Dirac
will speak here, meanwhile leave open the question whether it will be possible to satisfy 
the claims of the two theories without at the same time determining the Sommerfeld fine-structure constant. 
The attempts made hitherto
to achieve a relativistic formulation of the quantum theory are all based on
visual concepts so close to those of classical physics that it seems impossible
to determine the fine-structure constant within this system of concepts. The
expansion of the conceptual system under discussion here should, furthermore, be closely associated 
with the further development of the quantum
theory of wave fields, and it appears to me as if this formalism, notwithstanding its thorough study 
by a number of workers (Dirac, Pauli, Jordan,
Klein, Wigner, Fermi) has still not been completely exhausted. Important
pointers for the further development of quantum mechanics also emerge
from the experiments involving the structure of the atomic nuclei. From
their analysis by means of the Gamow theory, it would appear that between
the elementary particles of the atomic nucleus forces are at work which dif-
fer somewhat in type from the forces determining the structure of the atomic
shell; Stern's experiments seem, furthermore, to indicate that the behaviour
of the heavy elementary particles cannot be represented by the formalism
of Dirac's theory of the electron. Future research will thus have to be prepared for surprises which 
may otherwise come both from the field of experience of nuclear physics as well as from that of 
cosmic radiation. But however the development proceeds in detail, the path so far traced by the quantum theory 
indicates that an understanding of those still unclarified features
of atomic physics can only be acquired by foregoing visualization and objectification to an extent greater 
than that customary hitherto. We have
probably no reason to regret this, because the thought of the great epistemological difficulties with 
which the visual atom concept of earlier physics
had to contend gives us the hope that the abstracter atomic physics developing
at present will one day fit more harmoniously into the great edifice of Science.